.\" git-ai-commit(1) — commit staged changes with an AI-generated message.
.\" To make this page available via `git help ai-commit`, add the directory
.\" containing this file's parent (scripts/man) to MANPATH:
.\"   export MANPATH="$MANPATH:/path/to/phlex/scripts/man"
.\" or symlink/copy it to $(git --man-path)/man1/git-ai-commit.1.
.TH GIT\-AI\-COMMIT 1 "" "phlex" "Git AI Tools"
.SH NAME
git\-ai\-commit \- commit staged changes with an AI\-generated message
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBgit\-ai\-commit\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR \fIGIT\-COMMIT\-OPTIONS\fR]
\fBgit ai\-commit\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR \fIGIT\-COMMIT\-OPTIONS\fR]
\fBecho\fR \fI"context"\fR | \fBgit ai\-commit\fR \fB\-\-yes\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgit\-ai\-commit\fR analyses the Git index of the current repository and
generates a detailed, informative commit message using a language model.
It then optionally runs \fBgit commit\fR with the generated message.
.PP
The tool follows the git subcommand plugin convention: because the script is
named \fBgit\-ai\-commit\fR and resides on \fBPATH\fR, Git recognises it as
\fBgit ai\-commit\fR.
.PP
Supplemental context can be piped on standard input:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
echo "Fixes #42" | git ai\-commit \-\-yes
.fi
.RE
.SH CONTEXT SOURCES
The following sources are read automatically and included in the prompt
sent to the language model.  Pass \fB\-\-no\-instructions\fR to suppress all
sources except the diff, status, and log.
.TP
\fBStaged diff\fR
Output of \fBgit diff \-\-cached \-\-stat \-p\fR, with hunk\-aware truncation
applied to whole file sections and binary/generated files skipped.
.TP
\fBGit status\fR
Output of \fBgit status \-\-short\fR.
.TP
\fBRecent commits\fR
Output of \fBgit log \-\-oneline \-5\fR.
.TP
\fBRepository guidance\fR
\fBAGENTS.md\fR, \fBAGENT.md\fR, \fBGEMINI.md\fR, \fBCLAUDE.md\fR, \fBCONTEXT.md\fR,
\fBINSTRUCTIONS.md\fR, \fBCONTRIBUTING.md\fR, \fBHACKING.md\fR, \fBARCHITECTURE.md\fR,
\fBSTYLEGUIDE.md\fR, \fB.cursorrules\fR, \fB.clinerules\fR, \fB.windsurfrules\fR,
\fBq.rules\fR, \fB.kilocoderules\fR, \fB.gemini\-rules\fR.
.TP
\fBTool\-specific rules\fR
\fB.kilo/agent/\fR, \fB.kilo/command/\fR, \fB.amazonq/rules/\fR, \fB.kiro/rules/\fR,
\fB.kiro/steering/\fR, \fB.gemini/rules/\fR, \fB.kilocode/\fR,
\fB.github/copilot\-instructions.md\fR.
These are skipped when \fBAGENTS.md\fR or \fBAGENT.md\fR is present and
non\-empty, since those files are intended to synthesise the tool\-specific
rules.
.TP
\fBUser\-level instructions\fR
\fB~/.config/git\-ai\-commit/instructions.md\fR (primary),
\fB~/.config/copilot/instructions.md\fR (fallback).
.TP
\fBGit commit template\fR
The file referenced by \fBgit config commit.template\fR, if set.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-amend\fR
Amend the previous commit.  The prior commit message is included as
context so the model can revise it based on the newly staged changes.
Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR in effect (the generated message is
still shown for confirmation).
.TP
\fB\-\-context\fR \fITEXT\fR
Additional context or instructions to append to the prompt.  Useful for
noting issue numbers, rationale, or constraints the model should consider.
Context provided on standard input is appended after any \fB\-\-context\fR text.
.TP
\fB\-\-backend\fR \fIBACKEND\fR
API backend to use.  One of \fBkilo\fR (default), \fBgithub\-models\fR,
\fBcopilot\fR, \fBantigravity\fR, or \fBagy\fR.  See \fBBACKENDS\fR below.
Overridden by the \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_BACKEND\fR environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-model\fR \fIMODEL\fR
Model name to use.  For the \fBkilo\fR backend, the default is
\fBqwen/qwen3\-coder\-next\fR (resolved via the model name or with provider
prefix).  If a model name without a provider prefix is provided (e.g.,
\fBqwen3\-coder\-next\fR), \fBgit\-ai\-commit\fR looks up the model in
\fB~/.config/kilo/kilo.jsonc\fR to add the appropriate provider prefix
(e.g., \fBqwen/qwen3\-coder\-next\fR).  For other backends, the defaults are:
\fBgpt\-4o\fR for github\-models and copilot, none for antigravity/agy.
Overridden by the
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_MODEL\fR environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-api\fR \fIURL\fR
Override the API base URL.  For the \fBkilo\fR backend, this is required
(either via environment variable \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_API\fR or the \fB\-\-api\fR
option) unless using another backend with a default URL.
Overridden by the \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_API\fR environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR
Generate the commit message and print it to standard output without
running \fBgit commit\fR.  Useful for scripting or inspection.
.TP
\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-yes\fR
Skip the interactive confirmation prompt and commit immediately.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-edit\fR
Open the generated message in \fB$EDITOR\fR (falling back to \fB$VISUAL\fR,
then \fBvi\fR) before committing.  Lines beginning with \fB#\fR are stripped.
An empty message aborts the commit.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-instructions\fR
Skip all instruction and context files; include only the diff, status,
and recent log in the prompt.  Reduces token usage and latency.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-\fR \fIGIT\-COMMIT\-OPTIONS\fR
Everything after the \fB\-\-\fR separator is forwarded verbatim to
\fBgit commit\fR without interpretation.  Use this to pass options that
\fBgit\-ai\-commit\fR does not handle directly, for example:
.RS 8
.nf
git ai\-commit \-\-yes \-\- \-\-no\-verify \-\-signoff
git ai\-commit \-\-yes \-\- \-\-gpg\-sign=KEYID
.fi
.RE
.SH BACKENDS
.TP
\fBkilo\fR
LiteLLM\-compatible endpoint via the \fBkilo\fR CLI (\fBkilo run \-\-agent=code\fR).
The kilo backend reads its configuration from \fB~/.config/kilo/kilo.jsonc\fR.
Model names without a provider prefix are auto\-resolved by looking up the
model in the kilo config.  The \fB\-\-agent=code\fR option is always passed to
the kilo CLI.
.PP
Token is taken from \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_TOKEN\fR and passed to the kilo CLI via
the \fBKILO_SERVER_PASSWORD\fR environment variable.  If unset, no token is
sent to the API.  The API base URL can be overridden via \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_API\fR
or passed as \fBKILO_SERVER_URL\fR.
.TP
.TP
\fBgithub\-models\fR
GitHub Models inference API (\fIhttps://models.inference.ai.azure.com\fR).
Default model: \fBgpt\-4o\fR.
Falls back to the \fBcopilot\fR backend on HTTP 401 or 403.
Token resolution order:
.RS 8
.IP "1." 4
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_TOKEN\fR
.IP "2." 4
\fBGITHUB_TOKEN\fR / \fBGH_TOKEN\fR
.IP "3." 4
\fBgh auth token\fR
.IP "4." 4
\fB~/.config/gh/hosts.yml\fR
.RE
.TP
\fBcopilot\fR
GitHub Copilot API (\fIhttps://api.githubcopilot.com\fR).  Exchanges a
GitHub OAuth token for a short\-lived Copilot bearer token before each
request.  Default model: \fBgpt\-4o\fR.
Token resolution order: same as \fBgithub\-models\fR.
.TP
\fBantigravity\fR (or \fBagy\fR)
Antigravity CLI (\fBagy\fR). Runs the prompt non\-interactively via
\fBagy \-p \-\fR. If a model is specified via \fB\-\-model\fR, it is forwarded
as \fB\-\-model\fR to \fBagy\fR. Otherwise, \fBagy\fR uses its default
configured model. No API token or URL resolution is required for this
backend.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_TOKEN\fR
API token.  For the kilo backend, this is optional; if unset, no token
is sent to the API.  For other backends, this takes precedence over
all other token sources.
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_MODEL\fR
Default model name.  Overrides the backend default.
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_API\fR
API base URL override.  Required for the kilo backend.
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_BACKEND\fR
Default backend (\fBkilo\fR, \fBgithub\-models\fR, \fBcopilot\fR, \fBantigravity\fR, or \fBagy\fR).
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_KILO_API\fR
Deprecated.  Use \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_API\fR instead.
.TP
\fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_KILO_MODEL\fR
Deprecated.  Use \fBGIT_AI_COMMIT_MODEL\fR instead.
.TP
\fBEDITOR\fR, \fBVISUAL\fR
Editor invoked by \fB\-\-edit\fR.  Checked in order; \fBvi\fR is the final fallback.
.SH EXAMPLES
Stage all changes and commit with a generated message, confirming interactively:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git add \-p
git ai\-commit
.fi
.RE
.PP
Amend the last commit with an updated message reflecting new staged changes:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git add \-u
git ai\-commit \-\-amend \-\-yes
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview the generated message without committing:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git ai\-commit \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.PP
Commit immediately, skipping pre\-commit hooks, using the copilot backend:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git ai\-commit \-\-backend copilot \-\-yes \-\- \-\-no\-verify
.fi
.RE
.PP
Provide extra context from stdin:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
echo "Closes #1234; keep message terse" | git ai\-commit \-\-yes
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB~/.config/git\-ai\-commit/instructions.md\fR
User\-level instructions included in every prompt.
.TP
\fBscripts/man/man1/git\-ai\-commit.1\fR
This man page.  To make it available via \fBgit help ai\-commit\fR, add
\fBscripts/man\fR to \fBMANPATH\fR:
.RS 8
.nf
export MANPATH="$MANPATH:$(git rev\-parse \-\-show\-toplevel)/scripts/man"
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgit\-commit\fR(1), \fBgit\-add\fR(1), \fBgit\-diff\fR(1)
.SH AUTHORS
Developed as part of the Phlex project
(\fIhttps://github.com/Framework\-R\-D/phlex\fR).
